---
layout: default
title:  "Epoch of Reionization"
date:   2020-05-18 13:07:46 -0700
categories: pizza
---

Indeed, in the beginning, the Universe was essentially without form. The Big
Bang, a period in which the Universe expanded by huge factors, left a universe
that was essentially isotropic (of the same shape no matter what orientation it
was looked at) and smooth: every point in space was essentially
indistinguishable from any other point in space.

While the Big Bang itself was a very hot event that allowed enough energy to
fuse together the building blocks in protons and neutrons and electrons into the
atoms that would eventually build the Sun and our Solar System, the ensuing
period afterwards saw the universe cool to the extent where this could no longer
happen.

This period, recombination, saw the opaque gas of ionized hydrogen (which was by
far the most common atom created ine Big Bang) turn into molecular hydrogen, the
kind that we recognize on Earth. This molecular hydrogen is clear (as one can
readily see), and as such, the Universe became clear to light for the first time
in its history, lifting the fog on the Universe to observers imposed since its
birth.

---

The universe at this time is a huge volume of hydrogen of nearly even density.
However, it is not quite perfectly even in density, a property reflected today
in a snapshot of the recombination period called the Cosmic Microwave Background
(CMB), which found that the Universe was warmer (very slightly) in some parts of
the sky than others, and therefore slighly less dense, in the same way that the
air in hot air balloons is less dense than the air around it. This slight lack
of smoothness is essential in the creation of our very distinct and clearly not
perfectly even Universe of today.

As the Universe is not quite even in its density, it is allowed to clump
together under the force of gravity into distinct clumps of hydrogen gas,
allowing for the stage to be set for a Universe to be molded into its current
form.

---

This is a contemporary protostar, a reasonable facsimile of what the earliest
blooming stars in the Universe may have resembled. We cannot see individual
stars form from this era, as they are some thirteen billion years in the past
and therefore proportionally far away (due to the finite speed of light), but
the physics are relatively similar now as they were in those early days.

Protostars like this one gain energy from the speed gained by particles
collapsing inwards on the nascent star, giving them the energy that allows for
the beginning of nuclear fusion, lighting the Universe anew with ionizing
radiation, creating the second ionized period of the Universe which we live in
today. As such, this dawning of new light on the Universe is called the Epoch
of Reionization.

These early bloomers are the first glimpses of the Universe we know today, and
their existence, as far as we know, was not very long: no stars from this
original period seem to exist today, as they probably formed very large and have
correspondingly short lifetimes. Like these stars, though, the Universe itself
was living at a breakneck pace.

At the time of about 300 hundred million years since the Big Bang, the Universe
was an unrecognizable, smooth mush; five hundred million years later,
a time period approximately as long as species such as horseshoe crab have
existed on Earth, the Universe had become eminently recognizable to our own. It
is this astounding progression that inspires the great deal of research that has
gone into this time period of history, research that has been aided by some of
the most impressive and expansive instrumentation in astronomy, instruments that
rival other great feats of engineering for the most impressive works that
humanity has wrought.

---

Perhaps the most famous radio telescope is Aricebo, located in Puerto Rico. Its
thousand foot dish was one of the largest structures in the world when it was
built, a structure worthy of being a backdrop for a James Bond film (GoldenEye).
It has since been passed in its size by dishes such as the Five hundred meter
Apeture Spherical Telescope (1600') in China, as well as by telescope arrays
such as the Jansky Very Large Array (VLA), but the scale of any of these
instruments is nearly unparalleled. These telescopes can be so big because they
don't have to be precise to quite the same levels as optical telescopes, and in
their size they allow for some incredibly fine resolution imaging of a very old
Universe.

Radio telescopes are particularly suitable for seeing the conditions of the
universe, which can not only see the very faint backdrop of the fireball from
which the Universe started, but also the tale told by a hint left in the quantum
mechanics of the hydrogen atom.

A fascinating and very useful property of the hydrogen atom, which makes up the
vast majority of the Universe, is its 21 centimeter spin-flip transition.
Essentially, the hydrogen atom can undergo a spontaneous reorganization of its
magnetic poles, releasing a vibration in the form of light that is 21
centimeters in wavelength. It is this rare and random vibration that radio
telescopes can use to map out where neutral hydrogen atoms live and therefore
where the stuff in the Universe is. This map of neutral hydrogen, that which has
not been perturbed by intense starlight, is the map of how energy and matter was
and is distributed through our universe.

It is with these tools that humanity can see into its very origin story, with
eyes a thousand feet wide that can gaze far back in time to the seething fire
with which it was cast into existence as well as the murmurs of clumps of gas
billions of years old. And it is with these tools that we have finally started
to put the puzzle together, at least emperically, on some of our questions on
how we all came to be.


